Midi Design
Greg Lee, 4/02




			Synthesis Model

TiMidity has a tone generator, two envelope generators, three low frequency
sine-wave oscillators, a low pass filter, and an effects unit.

The tone generator resamples instrument patches at the basic frequencies appropriate
for specific notes being played.  (The interpolation algorithm used is selectable
using the four checkboxes on the upper panel.)

The envelope generators modulate each note with successively: an attack phase, a
hold phase, a decay, and a release.  One of the generators affects amplitude,
and the other affects pitch and/or the cutoff frequency of the low pass filter.

The low frequency oscillators modulate amplitude (for tremolo), frequency (for
vibrato), and the low pass filter cutoff frequency (XG "rezo sweep").

The effects unit supplies echo, detuning, reverberation, chorusing, celeste, and
phaser effects.  Echo (done by generating extra echo notes) and reverbration
(done with a filter) implement midi reverberation.  Detuning (done by generating
extra pitch bent notes) and chorusing (done with a filter) implement midi
chorusing.

Instruments may have either one or two tone elements, and for each of these,
a patch set may provide separate patches for different note-velocity ranges
(commonly for pianos) and for different note-pitch ranges.  GUS patch sets,
however, provide only one tone element and one velocity range per instrument.


			Midi Implementation

Almost all midi messages and controllers that I'm aware of are implemented somehow
(meaning that they cause something to happen, if not necessarily the right thing).
NRPN controllers for setting attack and decay time are not implemented, because
I haven't found any midi files that use them.  The flanging controller is not
implemented (though flanging requested in an XG sysex dump is implemented).  Only
a few of the hardware oriented controls in Roland and Yamaha system exclusive
dumps are implemented.

TiMidity can handle midi files meant to play on up to four synthesizers, keeping
separate the four sets of 16 channels for each synth.  However, in the midi file,
the synths have to be selected using port commands (in either Roland-GS or
Yamaha-XG sysex dumps).  Some midi files intended for multiple synths don't have
port commands.  (The info window shows port commands when present.)



			Volume

I've reduced the volumes levels TiMidity generates quite a lot, as compared with
the original implementation.  This minimizes clipping and gives an increased
dynamic range.  (There may be some artifacts now at low volumes, unfortunately.)
If you need more volume, I suggest you turn up the volume somewhere else, either
use a mixer to turn up the line volume, the mixer volume for /dev/dsp, or turn up earphones,
amplified speakers, or whatever.


			Computation Issues

TiMidity can fall behind in computing data to send out to the sound driver, and
then there are dropouts in the music.  TiMidity tries to anticipate the possibility
of a dropout by monitoring the state of its output buffer and those of the
sound driver, and when there is not much in the buffers, it tries to catch up
by minimising the calculations it has to do: it uses a cruder interpolation
routine in resampling, stops doing extra echo and detuned notes for reverb and
chorus effects, and starts terminating notes early, or even skipping notes
altogether.  So, depending on midi song, patchset, how fast your system is,
even if you don't hear dropouts, you will notice a loss in quality as TiMidity
gets busier.

Monitoring the output buffer involves calling the sound driver to find out how
much data it has buffered up.  I know how to do this for Hannu Savolainen's OSS
driver (Linux and some other systems), perhaps for older Suns (it used to work),
but not for other drivers.


			Memory Issues

It's possible for TiMidity to use an excessive amount of memory for patches.  Symptoms
are your window system becoming very sluggish, or crashing.  This is probably only
a problem when using big sf2 soundfonts of 30+ megabytes.  For instance, the
piano patches in Personal Choice's PC400 soundfont can occupy 25 megs each.  After playing
a list of midi files which use three of these pianos, well, that's 75 megs of
ram right there.  TiMidity assumes a maximum number
of megs to be used to keep patches used in playing previous midi files;  when this
maximum is exceeded, TiMidity will unload least recently used patches, returning
ram to the system.  The default maximum is 60 megs, which works ok on my system (I
have 48 megs ram and 196 megs cache).  Setting this to a lower value means that
more patches have to be reloaded from patch files as you play through a list of midi
songs, which slows things up.  If you're ram rich, you can set it to "no limit".
If you allowed enough room, entire soundfont files are read at once, instead of
patch by patch.  Setting the maximum too low can be counterproductive, because
soundfont files occupy much less memory in toto when the entire file is read than when
the patches are read individually (I don't know why).

For little-endian systems like x86, rather than being read in, sf2 soundfonts are
mmapped.  This is much faster on startup.  I haven't figured out a way to do this
for big-endian systems.

